# Sorting

Sorting is a fundamental algorithm problem. The basic problem in sorting is defined as follows:

> Given an array of $n$ elements, sort the array in increasing order

# $O(n^2)$ algorithms

Simple algorithms for sorting arrays work in $O(n^2)$ time. For example, bubble sort, where the elements "bubble" in the array according to their values

```cpp
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < n - 1; j++) {
        if (array[j] > arr[j+1]) {
            swap(array[j], array[j + 1]);
        }
    }
}
```

# $O(n \log n)$ algorithms

Merge sort is used to efficiently sort arrays in $O(n \log n)$ time. `mergeSort(array, a, b)` sorts a subarray `array[a, ..., b]`. The procedure is as follows:

1. If $a = b$, do nothing because the subarray of size 1 is already sorted
2. Calculate the position of the middle element (`k = floor((a + b)/2)`)
3. Recursively sort the left half (`array[a, ..., k]`)
4. Recursively sort the right half (`array[k + 1, ..., b]`)
5. Merge the sorted subarrays together into a sorted array

## Lower Bound of Sorting ALgorithms

Is it possible to sort an array faster than in $O(n \log n)$ time? It turns out that this is not possible when we restrict ourselves to sorting algorithms that are based on comparing array elements.

For each comparison of 2 elements ($x < y?$), we reveal more information about the array. For each comparison, the answer is either true or false, hence the decision tree is actuallly a binary tree. The results of the process are the possible ways to sort the array, and there are $n!$ possible ways to arrange an array of $n$ elements. Hence, the height of the tree must be at least $\log_2 n!$, and hence the lower bound for the time complexity is

$$
T(n) = \log n! \geq \frac{n}{2} \log_2 \frac{n}{2}
$$

# Counting Sort

The lower bound of $O(n \log n)$ does not apply to counting sort because it does not use comparisons. Counting sort runs in $O(n)$. Counting sort assumes that every element in the array is between $0$ to $c$, and $c = O(n)$

1. Create a bookkeeping array
2. Index `i` of the bookkeeping array is the number of occurences of the element with value `i` in the original array
3. Do a linear scan of the entire array, and update each element's frequency in the bookkeeping array

Counting sort only works if $c$ is sufficiently small ($c ~ O(n)$)





