# Overview

# Internet Protocol

Recall the 5 layers in the TCP/IP protocol

1. Application
2. Transport
3. Internet
4. Network/Data link
5. Physical

There are 2 types of switched networks
1. Circuit switched networks
2. Packet switched networks

Packet switched networks can transmit **without establishing a communication path**. However, each packet is appended a header H so that the intermediate packet-switched nodes know how to send it to the destination. Also, data is divided into suitable sized packets depending on the maximum transfer unit (MTU) of individual network (This process is called **fragmentation**)
- A maximum transmission unit (MTU) is the largest packet or frame size, specified in octets (eight-bit bytes) that can be sent in a packet- or frame-based network such as the internet.

Internet Protocol has 2 basic protocol functions
- Addressing: Being able to send the data to the correct destination
- Fragmentation: Dividing data into suitably sized smaller packets

IP provides a **connectionless**, **unreliable**, **best-effort** datagram service
- Connectionless: Each packet handles itself independently, no communication path has to be set up beforehand
- Unreliable: No error control
- Best-effort: No guarantees on throughput, delays, or Quality of Service

The IP header (specifically IPv4) contains the following fields
- VER (4 bits): The version of IP used. Usually 4
- HLEN (4 bits): Internet header length. The length of the header in multiples of 4 bytes. Usually 5 (header length is 5*4 = 20 bytes)
- Type of Service (8 bits): Used for Quality of Service purposes. Helps to prioritise different types of data.
- Total length (16 bits): Length of entire datagram including header in bytes. Maximum is 65535 bytes.
- Options (variable length): Ignored
- Protocol (8 bits): Indicates the protocol that IP is carrying (e.g., 0x06 for TCP, 0x11 for UDP)
- Header checksum (16 bits): Used to verify that the header is error-free
- Source and destination IP address (32 bits each): Indicates source and destination IP addresses

IP Address
- A unique address assigned to a host/router interface

| IP class | Leading Bit | Number of bits used for network | Number of bits used for host | Network Size | Addresses per network |
| -------- | ----------- | ------------------------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------ | --------------------- |
| A        | 0           | 8                               | 24                           | $2^{7}$      | $2^{24}$              |
| B        | 10          | 16                              | 16                           | $2^{14}$     | $2^{16}$              |
| c        | 110         | 24                              | 8                            | $2^{21}$     | $2^{8}$               |
| D        | 1110        | -                               | -                            | -            | -                     |
| E        | 1111        | -                               | -                            | -            | -                     |

Special IPv4 Addresses

- All 0s, can only be used as a source address
    - 0.0.0.0: This host on this network
    - 155.69.0.0: Network ID for network 155.69.0.0/16. If we had a host with IP = 155.69.8.9, it belongs to the network 155.69.0.0/16
- All 1s: Can only be used as a destination address
    - 255.255.255.255: Limited broadcast within the host's own network
- Loopback address (127.x.y.z)
    - Internal loopback to the same host. Used for self-testing of network software. E.g. 127.0.0.1 (localhost)

Subnetting
- A network can be split into smaller subnets, for easier management 
- Done by adding another level of hierarchy to the IP address structure
- Subnets are only visible within the organisation, hence the organisation is free to decide number of bits for the subnet and the hosts. Externally, the organisation's network is still viewed as a single network

Subnet Masks
- To indicate the length of the network prefix, we use a subnet mask w.x.y.z, where the first $n$ bits are 1s, and the remaining are 0. $n$ is the length of the network prefix
- To figure out the network ID from the IP address and the subnet mask, we AND the IP address with the subnet mask
    - E.g. IP address: 166.113.248.0, and subnet mask: 255.255.0.0, we can see that the network prefix is 8 bits long, and the network, ID is 166.113.248.0/16
    - The /x indicates the length of the network prefix (it has length x)
- The maximum number of hosts in each subnet is $2^n - 2$, where $n$ is the length of the network prefix. This is due to having 2 reserved IP addresses for each network
    - If the host ID is all 0 (E.g. 155.69.0.0/16), this indicates the network ID number
    - If the host ID is all 1 (E.g. 155.69.255.255/16), this indicates a broadcast address on the network 155.69.0.0

IPv4 Exhaustion

- With IP classful addressing, there is inefficient use of address space. 128-2 = 126 organisations own a class A IP address, which is 50% of the total IP addresses in the world. While 16384 organisations own 25% of the total IP addresses (class B), each class B address supports up to 65534 hosts. A majority of organisations do not need that many hosts. Wasteful

Solutions to IPv4 Exhaustion

- Classless Interdomain Routing (CIDR) (short-term): Reduces wastage in address allocation. Organisations are given adequate, but not excessive address space
    - Length of network prefix can be any length, but requries a network mask
    - Each IP address is in the form w.x.y.z/n, where n is the length of the network prefix
    - For router to router links, we optimise the use of IP addresses by using a /30 IP address to the link. E.g. for the network 172.16.31.0, we can assign 172.16.31.1/30 and 172.16.31.2/30 to the router, and 172.16.31.3/30 as broadcast
- Network Address Translation (NAT) using private IP addresses (Will ease but not solve the problem): A single machine with an IP address representing many computers behind it. IP address will require translation
    - Private IP addresses will not be forwarded to the internet
    - Different private networks can re-use the same private IP addresses
    - By using a NAT-enabled router, only 1 IP address required from ISP to support to whole private network to connect to the internet
    - Router keeps a NAT translation table
- IPv6, 128-bit space (long-term solution): Enough for several billion computers per square meter on earth. However, people have no motivation to upgrade
    - Expanded address space: 128 bits
    - Colon hexadecimal notation: AAAA:BBBB:CCCC:DDDD:EEEE:FFFF:0000:1111
    - Simplified header for faster processing
    - Note that IPv4 and IPv6 are incompatible. Only the first 4 bits (ver) are the same to distinguish them

IP Fragmentation and reassembly
- If IP Packet size > MTU, the packet is fragmented into smaller fragments

IP Routing
- Typically a host does not know how to send packets to destinations outside its own network. Hence, the host sends the packet to a default gateway (router) to assist in the forwarding

Address Resolution Protocol
- ARP request used to ask for MAC address of router
- Router responds with ARP reply, containing its MAC address
- Hosts maintain an ARP cache which expires after 2-20 minutes